You may recognize this man's face from the documentary
What the Bleep Do We Know!?
He is physicist Amit Goswami.
In our interview with Dr. Goswami
we discuss everything from what God is
to why our civilization has been stalled out
in its evolution for the past 2,700 years,
to the modern interpretation
of the Tibetan Book of the Dead, and reincarnation.
All of which is featured in his book, Physics of the Soul.
And he also explains that we cannot evolve as a species
until we move away from negative emotions
toward a life ordered by happiness rather than pleasure.
I like a the description you gave
in your lecture I heard just a little while ago
about what God is.
If you can say it again for everybody,
that would be wonderful
and that's going to be our starting place.
Well, we start with something
that is very easy to understand,
we start with the idea that there is an interconnectedness
in consciousness between all sunshine beings,
especially us, human beings, and God,
our non-local consciousness,
as we call it more objectively,
is that inteconnectedness.
This is the easiest thing to remember.
But if the tendency develops that the interconnectedness
is within space, then a part that tendency.
It is the interconnectedness that transcends space and time,
is that transcendental interconnectedness,
which we in quantum physics call non-local,
a signal less interconnected that does not require
any signals, energy carrying signal
to the space and time for communication.
This is the most important and most visual aspect
of the new definition of God
that is coming out of quantum physics,
but even more evocatively,
in quantum physics we look at objects
as quantum possibilities,
and a little bit of thinking shows us
that these are quantum possibilities
within this non-local consciousness
for consciousness to choose from.
So, in this way we have been looking
for God's causation,
causal power for a long time,
how is it exactly that God influences the world.
Now we know that how that influence occurs
is through this downward causation,
the choice from quantum possibilities.
It is God that chooses the actual eventum experience
from quantum possibilities.
Let's take that on
to an individuated soul level,
where we have this field of quantum possibilities,
and let's say, if you will take us on a quantum,
a non-local quantum soul journey
through the experience of earth life
from the initial stage,
which means there must be a choice,
as in individuated soul to incarnate
or into a continue incarnating soul,
obviously we're going to have patterns that come with that
and preferences and such,
if we're talking reincarnation, for example.
So let's just isolate it to one life
where we have a soul
with these possibilities
to be collapsed or chosen
that's going to create an incarnation
and the beginning of the connection
with the fetus even,
and the experiments that Helen Wambach
conducted regarding this,
I found that very interesting.
You are asking, in other words,
a modern version of Tibetan Book of the Dead,
which takes us through these bardos of life
and bardos of death gateways, passageways.
Surprisingly, quantum physics helps us
to construct such a picture.
So, at birth...
But birth here is a little bit tricky,
because what happens to the fetus,
the embryo that we are born as,
that is just a single cell birth.
So, single cells don't carry much of what
is in the previous incarnation.
So there is not much ongoing continuity as of yet.
But as this single cell forms multiple cells
and progresses a few more weeks
and the fetus starts forming with organs,
gradually the vital components of the soul
start manifesting, start being represented.
The mental components of the soul do not manifest
until probably the 14th or the 16th week
with the formation of the brain.
At that point only you can really say
that the soul has started,
the soul that is continuing through
birth, death, rebirth cycle,
that soul has fully manifested
in this fetus.
And that's interesting
because there's been of course the both age-old
and continuing argument as to when life begins,
an individual conscious life begins.
And in the experiment you wrote about
with Helen Wambach in the Past Life Regressions
many of the participants of the regressions were Christian,
some were devout Catholics.
The consensus seemed to come in around the sixth month mark,
is where the soul really started having the true connection
with the physical in uterine body.
And that could be understood,
because until the fourth month,
the brain doesn't event develop.
Until the sixth month really
the full fledged developmental process
of what we call a human being,
a human species, a definite percent of human species,
that doesn't show up until about the sixth month.
So I think that is very good verification
of when really we can say the human life begins.
Life begins no doubt, the single cell is also alive
and certainly life begins there,
but the soul has not entered it yet,
whereas soul begins entering a bit later,
maybe one week, two weeks, three weeks,
whatever we say, gradually.
Some of the morphogenetic fields that are involved
in the vital part of the soul,
that takes place in a few weeks
going to all the way to 16th week
when the even the mental part starts coming in.
But full-fledged,
complete soul
can be said to manifest
only about 6 months,
I think that's a good number to think of.
Then what happens in the actual
birth process from there?
So, the actual birth process is indeed,
there is an impact on many people
like Stan Grof talk about the birth-canal experience
as a traumatic change,
and there is a good reason to think
that it is a traumatic change,
because the first birth is taking place in the uterus.
So, it is a very different environment
than again going to the birth canal
and having birth in air,
which is separate from mother's womb,
that is a very, very difficult process
that the fetus goes through.
What proffers breath
that, for example, once you've made your appearance
into the world and the first breath happens,
what's happening with that non-local aspect of self?
I think the first birth is very interesting
from the non-local point of view,
because here was the fetus
when there was no division
with the consciousness of the mother.
It was definitely, you know, both of them
lived literally in a symbiosis,
two lives in one life.
And all of a sudden that connection is severed.
So again, life begins pretty justifiably
with that first breath,
that is also completely justified
because that's when individual life,
separate from the mother, begins.
So, we are not wrong in saying that is the birth time,
the birth astrologically that is very significant
and all that is correct,
because that indeed is the beginning
of the individual journey of the soul.
When you start watching
the child develop,
you start seeing propensities of behavior,
you can even have twins,
the exact same stimuli,
same environment, same nurture,
very, very different paths of progression.
Can you talk about this and its imprint
and patterns that are brought through
with a non-local aspect of self or the soul?
This is very interesting because what happens
is definitely, if we watch
child development,
one thing is very clear,
no child is born or hardly any child,
there is past differences here,
but the majority of children certainly are not born
as what is called Tabula Rasa,
it's not an empty slate,
it's certainly can be a very full sledge
in some cases like Mozart,
but it's at least substantially full
for most children
that grow up so very quickly they have abilities
that would take years if they would be learning
from scratch to develop.
So, that itself shows
that there must be propensities
that are being reincarnated.
In fact, that is one of the best evidence of reincarnation,
that we come with propensities
that one could not have been learned in this life.
People show propensities all the time
where there was no such learning process
that went in this life,
but nevertheless they had that capacity,
where did it come from?
See, it must have come from past life,
because some people of course say just
that genes cause everything,
but that is such a preposterous notion
that we don't even need to go very much into it.
Genes are basically instruction for making proteins,
they're not even responsible for building forms
in the formal organs.
This is where, for example,
Bruce Lipton's work, Biology of Belief,
as one example of what's actually
forming, creating formation of our characteristics
and such in life.
Exactly, and even before Bruce--
Rupert Sheldrake, yes,
and his morphogenetic fields' work.
One thing you've written
and I really underlined it in your book
Physics of the Soul,
if found quite interesting because its starts getting
into now how much is predetermined versus choice.
And you show some wonderful little drawings
of the karmic wheel: birth-death, birth-death,
birth-death, karma in, karma out,
"karma-cola," I think you called it at one point.
And you wrote a sentence that caught me, which said,
''The greater burden of memory and the greater
''the burden of memory in playback,
''essentially the less freedom of choice we have."
Can you please expand on that,
because that really rings true.
Yes it is true and what is very interesting
is that burden is avoided
when we reincarnate,
with a trick that has been verified
by some of the data,
by some of the past life regression therapists.
So, the idea is that we develop propensities.
As we develop propensities, patterns of habit,
patterns of habit can become quite heavy,
we become conditioned in a way
that is supportive sometimes for creative work,
but sometimes also quite destructive
of the creative tendencies.
For example, contradictory tendencies,
contradictory belief systems.
If we are too knowledgeable,
it's bound to happen,
because we do not always
develop in an equarant fashion,
specially in the spiritual directions,
we have all kinds of beliefs that are not always compatible.
For example, like we have a belief
that outer creativity is good for me,
mode of creativity meaning creativity in the world,
creativity where one does a definite product.
At the same time I'm attracted to the idea
that we should be spending time
peacefully with ourselves
and not engaging with the outer world.
Beliefs can often be contradictory.
What is happening now
is that we're at a full understanding of spirituality,
we find that spirituality consists of both directions.
So this incompatibility, which has flagged
spiritual people for millennia
is finally going away.
Now, what we find is that there are
two directions for spirituality,
and both are important, both are complimentary.
One is personal, we reincarnate
from one life to another, to another
to enrich the personal repertoire of expertise
and knowledge and understanding.
That is one direction of evolution.
But there is also a social direction of evolution,
which is evolution itself,
we evolve as a society, as a spices.
And human beings are still evolving
in the mental direction,
although the biological evolution
of the human being is complete with the brain,
but better and better representations of the mind
can be made in the brain
and this is the direction of future evolution.
So what has happened is that we now understand
that both kind of belief systems are important.
But it happens, there are many other contradictions
in our growing up,
and that causes the problem of burden.
It becomes a burden because they become a barrier
to farther our creativity.
So how to give it away?
It's very nice that when we incarnate
we don't bring all of our propensities from past life,
we bring only a portion of them.
Yes, and even within an incarnation
there must be ways for us to begin contending
with the carry forward of that burden.
One thing you talk about is the difference
between this kind of active creativity
you spoke of a moment ago
and fundamental creativity, for example,
the ability to reach up and access
into original types of thought,
truly original types of thought and theories.
How do we break free
of the kind of perpetual motion,
that wheel of karma we talked about,
to a higher range of access of information or knowledge
so that we can start creating
on a fundamentally creative level
our own lives and futures?
Takes a while, because what happens initially,
of course, the tendencies to be burdened
by this conditioning and forget about creativity.
So those are the first few
reincarnations for most people.
Then we learn to graduate to our situation or creativity,
we're not happy with conditioning,
we get bored with the condition of life.
So now we are empire building
and this is so enticing that this goes out
for many incarnations for most people.
And then gradually we get bored with that also,
and then the idea of fundamental creativity comes to us.
Once we start engaging in fundamental creativity
this is purifying by itself.
What happens is that we lose interest,
we become less and less interested in empire building,
building more and more creative enterprise
on one fundamental idea that we may have.
But still sometimes one gets into it
and difficult to get out of it because one feels a duty.
I mean in a way my present work
is a good example of it,
because it started with a very great notion
that consciousness is the ground of being
and science can be build within it.
But to build such a science
is largely a situational creativity,
not fundamental creativity,
although occasionally there is fundamental creativity
involved with it also.
But I feel it's my duty to do it.
So you yourself are giving to it
at the freedom to totally break free?
No, no, part of my mind wants to get
into engaging to the fundamental level of conscious self
of how to, for example,
become a total loving being,
unconditional love, and I continue to do that research
at a personal and scientific level,
but the focus is also on the external work,
developing this new science, new paradigm.
That just gives you an example of how hard it is.
Because we develop this sense of duty,
we bring that from our past life, I think.
Indians call it Dharma.
Can you talk about dharma with the little d
and Dharma with the big D?
Oh, Dharma with the big D just means
consciousness as a whole,
the best translation known
to the western audience is dough,
dough is Dharma,
Sanskrit name with capital D, Dharma.
But then there's little d dharma,
which is a little more obscure,
there is references to it
in The Bhagavad Gita and other treatises,
what is this dharma?
It is said in the The Bhagavad Gita
that one must pursue one's one dharma
and definitely not adapt to somebody else's dharma,
which is extremely dangerous.
Of course, today we find so may people
pursuing other people's dharma,
you know, most of our learnings come from other people,
this is such a shame, we don't even recognize
that the strong belief to which we create so many troubles,
so much trouble in the world actually other people's belief
that we have taken on from them,
it's not our original belief.
So, anyway, this not following
one personal's dharma
is a dangerous thing,
and today much of the social chaos that is being created
is because more and more people
are falling into the trap
of following somebody else's dharma.
Some charismatic leader comes
and then converts a whole bunch of people
to follow his ko-ran-kor dharma,
whereas these people's personal dharma
would have taken them elsewhere.
But how do we quiet ourselves
in the midst of all of this to be able as a being,
whether it's time to have times of reflection
or be still or quiet enough,
to connect with our individual dharma
when we have this societal, familial, etc. conditioning
that sucked us into the karma wheel to begin with?
This is difficult, obviously one has to distinguish
between what is called bliss or happiness
and what is called pleasure.
There is a lot of pleasure in pleasing somebody,
being in power, dominating others,
even though, it is a mo-rut do-mi-nus,
and ultimately I don't have power
but I get a little bit of power
by being associated with somebody powerful.
This is pleasure, this the brain circuits
that give us pleasure,
but it is conditioned.
Eventually the attraction to pleasure must give a way,
give a way to something which is more fundamental,
which is more lasting,
and that is what we call happiness.
Happiness is the connection with the whole.
Happiness is connected with healing,
wholeness, being healthy.
Being happy is being healthy, being wholly.
Those three are intimately connected.
We don't even recognize it when we are searching power,
when we are searching to dominate others
and because of that we are submitting our own dharma,
our own propensities and tendencies
to somebody else's dharma,
to somebody else's agenda and destiny.
So, that is the first distinction we have to achieve.
Which is a break that's almost enslavement
to the unhealthy aspect of ego, for lack of a better word.
For lack of a better word
and because it is pleasurable.
But pleasure invariably, used too much without moderation,
brings pain eventually.
We learn that too late in life
and by that time our propensities
have become very pleasure-oriented,
we have not satisfied our dharma,
we may not even know what we came here for,
what we wanted to really to do.
So at that step, as soon as you become aware
that I'm not really happy,
in spite of lots of pleasurable activities in my life,
I'm really not happy.
That is the time for every good person to think,
"Okay, let's turn to happiness, what will make me happy?"
This is very important, this is most important
in the soul's journey.
Now, is that the beginning then,
would you say, of a) the discovery
to dharma with a little "d," personal dharma,
but also to what you refer to as liberation?
That is the beginning of the journey towards liberation,
at that point we become interested
in what I call "inner creativity,"
at that point we want to change ourselves.
We have been living one way,
we are not satisfied with that anymore,
we want to live in such a way that fulfillment
comes in terms of wholeness and healing,
separate of these tendencies that I had.
Because any time I am just listening
to my brain circuit and conditioning,
I'm also being separate from the whole,
I'm not using my creativity,
I'm not using God's downward causation
or my free will at all.
Instead, I have surrendered my free will not to God,
but to a living human being,
which is, as I said earlier, dangerous.
Dangerous to me and also dangerous for other people also,
because if this is done en masse,
then obviously the movement
of consciousness is not being served.
Now, does that mean this is outside of consciousness?
No, consciousness handles it, but it generally
makes the evolution of consciousness stagnant.
We're not growing anymore as an evolving species.
And this is what is responsible
for some of our social calamities today,
you know, global warming, terrorism,
the breakdown of democracy and capitalism.
All this can be expressed very largely
to this lack of following
personal dharma
on the part of many, many people.
And this is, when you look at it en masse,
moving away from the personal development for a moment too,
en masse as a civilization,
you say of the four areas
of development that are commonly recognized
as a census to the feelings
to the mental into the intuitive,
we're stuck in the mental,
and this is an area where we get hung up in this,
this mass karmic wheel as well, isn't it?
Because we're thinking we're finding pleasure,
we're destructing ourselves,
but we're not really plugging in, are we?
We are not plugging in, we are not recognizing
that this is not the evolutionary movement.
Evolutionary movement always takes us
towards greater facility
for what we are doing here,
like processing meaning.
But if the meaning of life, if that is defined so narrowly
as to establish certain creeds and certain beliefs,
without even knowing what those beliefs
mean to me personally,
I'm so detest, so much of a follower
of other people's creed and beliefs,
that I don't even know what is the origin
of my personal attachment to these beliefs.
So it is a long way from here to there
where everybody becomes aware
of their personal little "d" dharma
and starts acting accordingly,
starts acting with creativity,
that is the first thing,
and then eventually turns to inner creativity.
And you, this is something you're working
on a number of different levels right now,
and that is a shift in the morphogenic field
toward an opening of the love centers
of our minds to begin,
is it fair in the parlance of quantum physics
to use the word "entrainment" in this?
To as we individually find our own way
through our dharma, recognizing our dharma,
living our lives in that way,
begin moving into these areas of love and healing that
that begins entraining the larger field to the same,
I mean isn't this a great hope that you're holding out
for society at this time?
Yes, I have such a hope based on a theory
that started with some ideas of Rupert Sheldrake,
went through a mythological skima of hundred monkeys
generalist effort was under the idea
that if hundred monkeys could learn a trait,
the trait becomes universally established
in all of this monkey species.
Which never really quite happened
in an experimental evidentiary way,
but nevertheless it is a nice myth.
And the idea is that, if enough of us
become aware of our dharma
and start developing through inner creativity
these love circuits, that you're referred to, in our brain,
then we'll be able to balance the negative tendencies
that today affect everyone.
Largely because of our misleading metaphysics
that materialist science has given us,
namely everything is patterned,
there is no causation other than material causation.
That largely because of how
that corrupts our political leader,
how we have a tendency to submit
to somebody charismatic,
submit our own will to that person's will.
All of these things have contributed to a situation
where we are very stuck
with a perversion of the rational process.
Rational process is fine as is,
except that it's easily perverted into following
our negative emotional instinctual tendencies.
What happens is that we start justifying
our behavior when the behavior is clearly clouded
by our negative emotions.
It is not really rational behavior,
but the rationality comes later to justify
whatever crazy insane behavior
that we were subjected to
during that period where we are
under that negative emotion.
It's really literally too.
Some leaders of our country, for example,
became very angry when 9/11 took place, justifiably.
It was a very violent, very callous,
extremely evil
happening.
And the immediate reaction
was one of intense anger,
and, of course, fear also in addition.
But to act from that anger and fear
is everything that the human being
is not supposed to do.
You're not supposed to act from this spite place
of anger and fear because our rational judgement
is clouded under those negative emotions.
What happened, however, is that people acted
from this place of negative emotions
and then started a huge number of justifications,
irrational justification of these acts,
which were not really up to par
for the rational mind,
rational mind should not act that way--
And this kept mass karma going
in a very wrong direction--
This is the mass karma going in terms of all of humanity,
perhaps that, perhaps it is just an aberration
because we have some
sort of evolutionary down
caused by this, you know, pendulum always swings
one way too much.
So, we needed the materialist science
in order to give us quantum physics,
in order to give us scientific methods
to analyze creativity,
in order to give us so many things
that we really need for future movement of evolution,
but the pendulum swings one way too much,
so we became believers in scientific materialism.
That was not necessary.
We could have given up materialism 40-50 years ago,
because the death sentence was already signed
by quantum physics itself,
and that is 75 years old, more than that.
But we didn't give up.
Instead, we've made it stronger
and we've made it almost compulsory
even succeeded, almost succeeded,
except for the last two decades
when the evidence started coming in
in a rapid way
and a theory was available,
we could have become totally materialistic.
But now, of course, substantial number of scientists
and substantial number of researchers
are finding evidence for the contrary.
So, I don't think it will happen,
paradigm will shift.
But it's taken a while.
As I was listening in your lecture a little while ago,
you were talking about the seeds,
the fact that seeds had been sown
for the newer consciousness 2,700 years ago.
And we seem to be stalled out.
Yes, we have stalled out.
The sages were very clear,
ethics was discovered
in several different parts of the globe
by Moses, by Jesus,
by Socrates and Plato,
by Buddha and preachers of the boi-na-shalts.
So, why haven't we pursued that?
The number of people, proportionately speaking,
that were "enlightened" in those days
has not changed today.
If you take proportionate number percentage,
then it's roughly the same percentage that remains
that becomes enlightened today.
And this is what it should not be
if evolution is going on.
So, evolution is stalled.
Do you have any idea why?
I think it is these instinctual circuits,
we did not incorporate that
in the stage of mental evolution.
Mental evolution is not developing the rational mind,
but we never incorporated
how to deal with negative emotions.
Negative emotions have to be balanced
with positive emotions.
We came to the new stage too soon.
We should have developed brain circuits
of positive emotions long ago.
We didn't, we moved into the rational mind,
which, of course, is logical, is step-by-step,
and therefore antithetical
to that illogical nature of healing,
and rational mind could not handle it.
To handle it, rational mind
has to surrender to the supra-mental.
So, although our spiritual teachers told us
to surrender to the supra-mental,
our rational mind, more and more it understood science
and understood how to handle
the natural phenomenon outside of us,
more and more it became daring,
daring enough to defy the supra-mental.
And that grew
a kind of a self-fulfilling prophecy
of making the rational mind supreme
and yet slave to the negative emotions.
Again, might this be a function of pleasure?
Yeah, it is.
Lack of wisdom, function of pleasure?
Lack of wisdom coming from being
too attached to pleasure and pain, the emotions.
We are attached to those negative emotions,
we are attached to pleasure.
We are attached to pleasure even forgetting
that pleasure eventually brings pain.
We are ready to even forget that,
but retain our attachment to pleasure.
And that attachment has to be given up
and in favor of happiness.
But at the same time,
we can do certain things
and evolutionary consciousness takes care of these things
somewhat automatically, fortunately.
So, one or few changes and right thinking begins.
As we think right, as we're thinking
of self-consciousness as a ground of being
and we have non-local interconnectedness,
naturally we are attracted
towards the positive emotions.
Because if you and I are interconnected
and I can be conscious with you,
obviously that is more fun
than just being conscious
with being with myself,
conscious with myself.
So, this discovery of relationship is a great thing.
And that is happening.
Today while in the relationship arena,
we have a chance of truly developing non-local relationship
with not only one person,
but with the large number of people.
We have a real chance, opportunity
of developing group consciousness like never before.
So we're breaking out of our own isolation?
We are breaking out of that individual isolation
that we are glorifying in our culture.
Even 50 years ago it was
all glorification of rugged individual.
But today we are not,
thanks to feminism, thanks to many
other developments in our culture,
we do not glorify this rugged individual image
as much anymore.
Instead, what we now glorify is that,
you know, internet friendships, groups,
movement to gather--
Connectedness.
Connectedness, connectedness.
So, let's go back and apply
what we've just been talking about
to a personal journey of the soul going
through this incarnation, the karmic wheel.
Let's say we've been able to break out
of some of the conditioning
that has accrued over multiple lifetimes.
And we're going to take an example of a life
who's jumping off the karmic wheel
prior to leaving this life and going
through the passage of death.
What is that like for that soul,
can you talk about that
breaking free of the karmic wheel?
Okay, I'll go through with it,
because that is part of the Tibetan Book of the Dead
and, of course, part of our image.
This breaking free has been a major part
of spiritual traditions for a very long time.
So, the first bardo after death
is supposed to be that breaking free,
if I can die consciously.
If I can immediately take charge
of the fact that the moment of death
is such a liberating moment,
that if I'm or were in that moment,
I come to touch with God as is,
my primary processing awareness.
One question, I want to inter-check here,
is it possible to break out of the karmic wheel
while you're living in the incarnation
prior to going through the death experience?
It is possible.
It is possible and this is called
a complicated Sanskrit term, ni-fi-cul-pa-sa-ma-dre,
in the Hindu tradition,
also called
"liberated while living."
So, that concept is there,
but I also warn you,
very few people,
probably countable on our fingers,
Jesus, Buddha, a couple of names
that immediately come to mind,
but not too many names of that ilk.
So, mostly this happens,
the liberation occurs at the point of the transition?
That is a much easier contention,
because all you have to do,
well, it's quite difficult, of course,
but still the chances are that you are conscious
at the moment of death,
and that moment is a very non-local moment.
There's much evidence in favor of it.
People report that when some people die,
with such lucidity occurs,
like a lighted being,
like the room becomes full of peace,
and like a lighted being is passing away.
So the understanding is that those beings
are literally experiencing
a liberated oneness of consciousness.
Tibetans call it seeing the clear light,
clear light of consciousness.
So, if the soul recognizes it,
Tibetan Book of the Dead says that soul is liberated.
In the modern version we say that,
well, if the readiness is there then that's it,
this becomes the final death
and there is no more journey of incarnation.
Reincarnation will stop, liberation has taken place.
Now, if the soul doesn't recognize,
in quantum physics to talking about this
a little bit risky,
because you have to recognize something.
No longer is there any brain
to manifest possibilities into actual events.
This is a big point I wanted to bring up too,
because many people think,
"Oh, this is a harsh place, I can't wait to go
"into the afterlife into my heavenly existence,
"where then everything will be revealed to me
"and I will know and I can create."
You're saying, not true,
certainly not from the quantum view.
There is no subject-object spirit
or is no manifest consciousness.
There is only possibilities.
And can you talk about,
bring that down to just a really simple analogy
that there are only possibilities but nothing
to structure it into an event or a reality.
It's very difficult to find an analogy for it,
because all analogy will be in terms of manifestation,
so will only create more confusion.
So let's just keep it that way,
that we become beings of possibility.
But all is not lost,
because there is another moment of manifestation,
which is the moment of next birth.
So, things can go on in possibility,
but these possibilities
when they finally manifest
at the moment of birth,
a whole chain of possibilities in the soul's journey
can manifest at that time.
This is the good news.
It is now an experimental fact
that our choice can be delayed.
We choose now, but that may determine something
that was supposed to happen before,
but actually not so in quantum physics.
There remain possibilities before.
So what Tibetans describe as Bardos,
they're possible bardos,
and only manifested at the moment of the next birth.
So, bardo number four is that seeing pure light.
If that happens, next part will never take place
and that is completely compatible.
In the next bardo, Tibetans call it fifth bardo,
they call it the seeing the dim light.
So, if you recognize it and still choose
the no-reincarnation-liberation path,
you are liberated again,
so no manifestation in the next birth,
completely compatible.
And then if you have not recognized,
then you just take birth.
But in that process that describes some
very interesting scenarios that occur
and those are the scenarios
that people sometimes able to remember
as part of their past life memory,
scenarios of heaven, hell that we live through
in possibilities, supposedly.
But when the final moment of birth
takes place with manifestation
some of these possibilities will actually manifest
as memory of experiences that took place.
This is why this mythology is developed,
that we go to heaven, or we go to hell,
or we go to realms,
they are actual experiences,
very much like in near-death experience
people have the same kind of thing.
Things develop in possibility,
but when we come back to our body
and are revived by the doctor, by the surgeon,
then that one event of manifestation
actually manifests,
events go into an entire causal chain.
And so, there in our memory we remember
that we had encounters with heavenly beings,
encounters with dead relatives,
we had out-of-the-body experiences,
but they are not really experiences
when we were "dead."
The experience is actually taking place retroactively,
going backward in time,
when you come to life once more.
So, the same thing happens in the death also,
we are coming to life once more at the next birth
in another body, that's the only difference.
Yes, but you have also said
and I may be getting this wrong,
might be splitting hairs here,
that often when we are receiving these insights
or flashes of creativity, intuition and so forth,
that that may also be a non-local
past version of ourselves
communicating with ourselves,
because, again, non-locality is beyond time and space.
So, we may be communicating something
from our past incarnations--
Yes, very well taken,
so, we can never distinguish
which of our actions
is being caused by in impetus from the past
or impetus from the future.
So this tolls it farther marker agenda
where we analyze our experiences.
It's not easy because there is non-linearity
of time that interferes.
But if we develop these love circuits,
as you say, I mean it really comes down to this,
if we develop these love circuits
and we start moving into the next area
of the intuitive aspect,
we're going to find our way correctly
regardless of messages coming from the past,
the future, or wherever, aren't we?
Absolutely, but there is a saying in spiritual traditions,
which is that "After the fact,
"everything that happens is good."
But after the fact,
before the fact we must try,
we must continue trying
not to justify what we are going to do,
but be open and try to do the best we can.
If you would give an example,
I think, that's concrete here how we en masse
and individually could have reacted to 9/11,
had we already started moving into our future
evolutionary development into the more intuitive,
the love, the beauty, ethics and goodness.
How would we have responded to that?
Well, we certainly would not have responded,
certainly caused war in our responses.
Even the war with Al-Qaeda,
which was necessary perhaps,
but certain channels were not even used.
The channels of especially the government of Pakistan
certainly should have been used.
Pakistan should have been involved
at much more intimate level,
and that perhaps opened
a communication channel to the Al-Qaeda.
This principle that people are guided by
as a guiding principle that I don't talk to any terrorists,
this is a principle that sounds good,
but in effect we have always talked to terrorists,
we have always done that.
Yes, nothing new here,
we've created a lot of them.
Who is Stalin but the greatest terrorist
that ever lived on Earth,
20 million people he created,
and we have not only talked to that terrorist,
we have taken his corporation in terms
of fighting war with that terrorist (mumbles)
So, we have done it all the time.
This brings up a good point,
are we en masse, you can say because we haven't
fully developed in this direction,
are we being manipulated
by maybe more negative
types of entities,
or are we co-creating this whole thing?
Co-creation is a word
which should not be used frivolously.
Ultimately we have the responsibility,
because, of course, movement of consciousness
is a holistic consciousness
and one can take the view
that everything is movement of consciousness
and ultimately that view is correct,
but immediately speaking,
the causation can be established,
things can be because of our creativity,
things can be because of our conditioning.
When our conditioning takes over,
then basically we have detached ourselves
from God, from divinity,
because there is no room
for downward causation changing anything.
Of course, that never can completely happen,
because we never completely can do that,
so eventually changes come about.
But when we have such conditioned,
conditioning take over, such as the tendency
for negative emotions to dominate us,
we shouldn't blame God for it,
because we are doing it sort of being detached from God,
not the other way round.
Nor should we take collective blame
in a cavalier way.
I think that would be too much,
that's not necessary.
Instead, let's just recognize
that because of these conditionings
sometimes drastic, evil
comes about in the world
and without our being aware,
a large number of people surrender
to the will of this evil charismatic leaders
and that caused atrocities.
That has happened over and over, many times.
The atrocities happen in the mental age
of evolution especially because one can use
the rational mind to give justifications
for even atrocious actions.
Witness the justifications of Iraqi word
that has been given so much,
and still being given.
Witness the justification for global warming
that is being given and so much
by the businesses, industries
that need to pollute.
This is the perverted use of rationality.
But we can't use rationality in a rational way,
because we are tired by these negative emotions.
In the first case because of this charisma or egotism,
megalomania, whatever you want to call it.
In the second case because of the greed of the industry.
These are all negative emotions.
Negative emotions cloud our judgement.
Until we have collectively
balanced these negative emotions
with positive energies of love,
we cannot be fully rational.
And only when we are fully rational en masse
then only we can move to the next stage of evolution,
which is the intuitive mind.
And you're working on this,
you're doing your part,
you're arranging some interesting things
that are going to be forth coming
in another few to several months,
part of it's called Quantum Activism.
Can you talk about what your general,
I know the particulars may not be worked out this moment,
but what is the general concept?--
The general concept of Quantum Activism is very simple.
Quantum physics has give us some wonderful principles:
non-locality, working together, collectively,
developing that interconnectedness, discontinuity.
Recognize that discontinuous changes
take place all the time in our lives.
We have done it quite often in our childhood.
And why not do it again?--
Any leaps of development with no connecting--
Quantum leaps of development in our own life.
So, take charge of those things.
And it is hard one, is tangled hierarchy,
instead of simple hierarchy,
we still continue
in spite of sexism, racism,
all these things coming to forefront or our consciousness
and somewhat resolved today in favor of more unification.
We still have the tendency of developing hierarchies
where we want to dominate another person.
Instead, if we learned to live
in tangled hierarchical relationship,
the causal hierarchy will always be as necessary.
So, there would be not many fixed causal relationships,
one-way causal relationships,
but all of our causal relationships
will become two-way.
If we used this quantum principle in our life,
then our personal life will be transformed.
But we must also simultaneously
learn to use them collectively.
We have not done this collective aspect
of using principle transformation very much in the past.
This is the new thing that has to happen.
And this is something
you are going to participate in bringing about?
This is something that I feel,
because of my grounding in quantum principles,
I feel that is very essential to bring in
the next step of our evolution,
the intuitive mind.
Well, we will be awaiting that
and everybody watching this
will be following your site as it comes along
and participating where we can,
I'm very sure.
Thank you so much
for taking the time to be with us.
For a greater understanding of Dr. Goswami's work
regarding the integration of physics
and the journey of the soul via reincarnation,
I highly recommend you read his book,
Physics of the Soul.
Until next time,
thanks for watching CMN.